---
index_title: Object Storage
title: What Is Object Storage?
wrapperClassName: career
---

# What Is Object Storage?

Object storage is a data storage system designed to manage large volumes of
unstructured data. It stores and organizes data into discrete units called
objects. Each object is characterized by three main components:

1. **Data**: actual contents of the object
1. **Metadata**: information about the object such as name, created/uploaded
   date, and file type
1. **Unique identifier**: usually a unique key generated by some hashing
   algorithm to identify and retrieve each object

Since object storage does not impose many restrictions on the type of objects it
can store, it is often used to store unstructured data that does not fit well
into other types of storage including pictures, audio, and other digital
content. Coupled with cloud technology, object storage makes up the backbone of
scalable, durable, highly-available, and cost-efficient storage options.

## File vs. block vs. object storage

Traditionally unstructured data was stored in a file or block storage. These
types of storage systems are still used but for different purposes:

### File storage

File storage systems like Amazon EFS and Google Filestore store data into a
hierarchical structure involving folders. Files are placed into folders that can
be stored at top-level or nested under other folders. To retrieve a specific
file, the path to that file must be known. Multiple devices (e.g., VMs, servers)
can access file storage concurrently. Compared to object storage systems, file
storage systems are less scalable, but can be a good option if a hierarchical
structure is already in place or if support for POSIX operations (e.g., updates,
random reads) or standard file systems are required.

### Block storage

From a user's perspective, block storage systems look and behave like a locally
mounted disk drive. However, behind the scenes, block storage systems break files
into discrete chunks called blocks and store them separately. Each chunk of data
is assigned a unique identifier, which is used to retrieve and assemble into the
full file when needed. Block storage is best suited for transactional workloads
or use cases that require consistent performance or lowest latency as block
storage is treated as a local disk . In general, block storage is often cheaper
than file storage systems, but has lower availability as only a single device
can attach to it. There are some cloud offerings that allow multiple devices to
attach, but they are limited to read-only operations.

### Object storage

Object storage systems store self-contained objects into flat data structures,
even though a hierarchical structure can be supported. Object storage is best
suited for workloads with relatively static data. Examples include static assets
(e.g., HTML, pictures, videos) that are not modified frequently, but read many
times. Object storage is massively scalable as its flat architecture allows for
horizontal scaling through adding more storage nodes. The biggest advantage of
object storage is that it is significantly cheaper than other options,
especially when less frequently accessed data can be archived or moved to
different tiers of storage.

## Examples of object storage

- [Amazon S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/)
- [Google Cloud Storage](https://cloud.google.com/storage/)
- [Azure Blob Storage](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/storage-blobs-introduction)
